---
title: On Time and Tone
published_on: "2020-12-31"
updated_on: "2021-01-01"
description: "Or: how I taught my playlists to update themselves."
type: "blog-post"
draft: false
tags: ['project']
---

In the taxonomy of my personal Spotify playlists, there are two phyla:
**temporal** and **tonal**.

**Temporal** playlists grow organically and without premeditation. Their purpose
is to capture the zeitgeist particular period, typically delimited by the
beginning and end of the temperate seasons, thereby allowing me to relive the
emotions of the time through its soundscape. When I find myself repeatedly
listening to a song, I eventually add it to the playlist for the current period.
In this way, these playlists grow quickly, all at once, and then not at all.
Once a new season arrives, a new playlist is minted, and the old one becomes
paralyzed, an audio time capsule frozen in time forevermore.

**Tonal** playlists are more similar to the conventional playlist in nature, in
that their constituent songs all share some common trait. For example, the songs
in my running playlist all possess a fast, consistent tempo, whereas those in my
study playlist possess a soothing instrumentality devoid of lyrical distraction.
These playlists are harder to develop, and songs must be sought out with
intentionality and purpose in order to curate the collection.

Within the phylum of tonal playlists are two sub-classes. In order to name
these, I'll borrow two terms from investing: [**passive** and **active**
management](https://www.investopedia.com/news/active-vs-passive-investing/).

Most of my tonal playlists begin as actively managed ones, as I spend the time
and effort to sift through the dozens of candidate songs to which a few are
granted admission. However, with time inevitably comes neglect, and the playlist
eventually becomes passively managed, a fate similar to that of the temporal
playlist.

Except, while this fate is definitional for the temporal playlist, it is
undesirable for the tonal one. An unchanging running playlist will fail to
motivate me with the new and energizing beats I seek. A constant study playlist
will eventually distract me with familiar and predictable melodies that disrupt
my flow.

I found myself wanting a way to automate the active management of my tonal
playlists: a process that would evolve their content dynamically, while holding
their essence constant.

Enter THESEUS.

---

[THESEUS](https://adisrini.com/theseus) is an application I built that achieves
the automatic active management I outlined above. The name pays homage to [the
metaphysical question](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ship_of_Theseus) originally
posed by Ancient Greek philosophers. In the context of playlists, specifically
tonal ones, I’d venture to say that the playlist remains the same despite its
constituent songs being substituted over time. The soul of the playlist is its
ability to invoke particular feelings, which is greater than the mere sum of its
parts.

Once you register a playlist with THESEUS, it will slowly add songs to the
playlist based on Spotify's Recommendations API. Eventually, it will remove old
ones. In this way, the playlist will completely change over the course of time,
while maintaining its essence. I’d encourage you to read the **How To** guide on
the application page itself, since any documentation here is bound to grow
stale.

---

Building THESEUS gave me the opportunity to use a variety of technologies, some
familiar, others novel.

The frontend web client was written using TypeScript, React, and Redux.
Naturally, I used the Spotify API to retrieve and update user data.

The backend was written using features from Google Firebase. In particular, I
used Firestore to persist the set of playlists a user registers to be managed by
THESEUS. I also used the pubsub feature of Functions to periodically run the job
to update all user playlists.

---

So, I hope you give THESEUS a try – it's quite simple to get started. If you do,
let me know what you think!