---
title: "Bookish #2: Project Hail Mary"
published_on: "2021-12-20"
bookish: ['Project Hail Mary']
type: "blog-post"
draft: false
---

## Introduction

I read [_Project Hail
Mary_](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/54906250-project-hail-mary) upon a
recommendation from a friend. I had read Andy Weir's [_The
Martian_](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/18007564-the-martian) some years
ago and enjoyed it, so I decided to give his third book a read (at time of
writing, I have not yet read his second book,
[_Artemis_](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/34928122-artemis)).

<div class="inline-image">
    <img src="./cover.jpeg" alt="Project Hail Mary"/>
</div>

I found the book to be similar to his first, at least at a high level. Both
novels are in the hard sci-fi genre, with an abundance of scientific detail and
justification provided. Both tales are also about resourceful and likeable
space-faring protagonists who spend a considerable portion of the book in
isolation, with their inner monologue therefore driving much of the narration.
Both books also contain elements of optimism regarding humanity and its virtues,
and inject a healthy dose of humor throughout.

Yet, the premises of the books are quite different. In _Project Hail Mary_, the
protagonist, Ryland Grace, has set sail for a destination much further away than
Mars – another solar system entirely – as part of a mission to save Earth from
an alien species that is depleting the Sun of its energy.

On his mission, Grace encounters a being from yet another species which he dubs
the 'Eridians'. These beings resemble large, pyramidal arachnids without eyes,
mouths, or noses. Unlike many other sci-fi books, and by virtue of being in the
hard sci-fi genre, the book attempts to explain various traits of the species
and how they could have conceivably emerged as a result of Darwinian forces.

In [my last Bookish post](/the-dark-forest), I wrote about another alien
civilization. I find these books interesting because they encourage us to eschew
the anthropic lens through which we usually view the world. By contrasting our
species with another, we are forced to grapple with fundamental questions about
our own kind, and why things are the way they are.

## Speech & Language

One consequence of Eridian biology is that they lack "sight", at least as
defined in the usual human sense of having biological machinery that perceives
photons of varying wavelengths and translates them into visual imagery. In order
to compensate, an Eridian's auditory faculties are far more sophisticated than
that of a human, and they rely on sonar in order to "see".

Perhaps unsurprisingly, Eridians too evolved the ability to communicate via
auditory language. In _Sapiens: A Brief History of Humankind_, Yuval Noah Harari
[postulates](https://libwww.cc.it-hiroshima.ac.jp/library/pdf/research53_001-010.pdf)
that language is a distinguishing ability of humankind that has allowed us to
cooperate at large scales and establish civilizations. If this theory is
correct, why shouldn't we expect other intelligent species to independently
evolve the ability to communicate via language?

'Eridianese' is similar to human language in some ways. For example, Eridianese
has an alphabet: a finite set of elements which can be composed together in
order to construct words, which can be further composed in order to construct
sentences, and so on. In this sense, the alphabet is an atomic building block
for language. An element of the alphabet itself rarely conveys any meaning; a
word is greater than the sum of its parts.

However, the Eridianese alphabet is quite different from Latin or Chinese ones
when it comes to speech. In order to pronounce different elements of most human
alphabets, we vary the [place and manner of
articulation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_Phonetic_Alphabet_chart)[^1].
Further, few human languages utilize pitch to represent elements of the
alphabet. Indeed, Mandarin possesses
[tones](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standard_Chinese_phonology), though these
rely on _relative_ pitches as opposed to _absolute_ ones. In direct contrast,
the Eridianese alphabet _is_ absolute pitch itself (modulo octaves), with the
place and manner of articulation having seemingly no bearing. More precisely,
the alphabet consists of _chords_ of notes, since Eridians have the ability to
"pronounce" multiple notes at once.

<div class="inline-image">
    <img src="./fourier-transform.png" alt="Fourier transform"/>
    <span class="inline-image-caption">The Fourier transform converts signals in the time domain to the frequency domain</span>
</div>

This happens to make speech-to-text shockingly easy to compute. Grace wields
some simple [Fourier transform](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fourier_transform)
software in order to decompose chords into their constituent notes, and then
catalogs their meaning in a spreadsheet. With a `VLOOKUP` query, Grace is able
to build a Eridianese-English dictionary.

Another similarity between spoken Eridianese and human languages are that they
occupy roughly the same frequency ranges. Considering the full spectrum of
frequency ranges, it's hard to imagine this would be a coincidence. Why don't
Eridians vocalize at extremely high or low frequencies, inaudible to human
beings? The answer proposed in the book is that certain sounds, like the one
made by objects colliding, have the same frequency universally. Natural
selection would therefore favor those who could hear the sound of hooves pushing
against the dirt, or of leaves rustling in a nearby bush, in order to protect
themselves against potential predators. If our auditory faculties evolved to
perceive these narrow frequency ranges, why should our spoken word occupy
another?

## Number Systems

In addition to evolving language, Eridians evolved a number system not unlike
our own. Although this isn't explained in the book, one could imagine how
Darwinian forces would favor those who can construct and communicate natural
numbers. The being who can count apples can determine which tree is most worth
climbing, in order to preserve the most energy while reaping the largest reward.
The being who can count bodies can determine whether they are outnumbered when
they encounter a rival tribe, in order to make a fight or flight decision.

The Eridian number system is different from ours in two primary ways: its
symbology and its [radix](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Radix). The former is
not surprising: after all,
[different](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chinese_numerals)
[human](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arabic_numerals)
[languages](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hebrew_numerals) use different symbols
for the natural numbers. The latter is not all that surprising either: [some
ancient human
civilizations](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Babylonian_cuneiform_numerals) used
base-60 number systems as opposed to the decimal system with which we are
familiar.

<div class="inline-image" style="width: 100%">
    <img src="./babylonian-numerals.png" alt="Babylonian numerals"/>
    <span class="inline-image-caption">Babylonian cuneiform numerals, which form a base-60 number system</span>
</div>

In the book, Grace rationalizes the Eridians' use of a base-6 number system
using the same argument for why humans use a base-10 system: each Eridian "hand"
contains 3 digits, so two "hands" would be able to count to 6. However, Eridians
have 5 such "hands" – why do they not use a base-15 number system instead? Like
6, 15 is [semiprime](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Semiprime). However, unlike
15, 6 is a [superior highly composite
number](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Superior_highly_composite_number), which
lends itself well as a useful radix. Perhaps some ancient Eridian civilization
used a base-15 number system, but they eventually switched to the base-6 system
for its merits. 12 is the next largest SHCN, which is one of the reasons why
many argue that a base-12 number system would have been more useful than the
base-10 number system we use.


## Intelligence

During one of their discussions, the Eridian poses the following question to
Grace.

>> “Better question,” he says. “Why we think same speed, question?”
>>
>> I shift over to lie on my side. “We don’t think at the same speed. You do math way faster than I can. And you can remember things perfectly. Humans can’t do that. Eridians are smarter.”
>>
>> He grabs a new tool with his free hand and gets back to tinkering. “Math is not thinking. Math is procedure. Memory is not thinking. Memory is storage. Thinking is thinking. Problem, solution. You and me think same speed. Why, question?”

The Eridian seems to believe that the ability to follow procedural instructions
and the capacity for memory are insufficient ingredients for "thought". I was
reminded of the [_Ant
Fugue_](http://themindi.blogspot.com/2007/02/chapter-11-prelude-ant-fugue.html)
from Douglas Hofstadter's [_Gödel, Escher, Bach]. In this chapter, we learn
about "Aunt Hillary", an entity observed to have thought and demonstrate
intelligence and consciousness. However, Aunt Hillary is not a single being, but
rather a colony of ants, each of which seemingly lack intelligence.
Consciousness, therefore, is greater than the sum of its parts. It is an
emergent feature, without explicit definition.

Computers can be aptly described as entities that follow procedural instructions
with the capacity for memory. Do they lack thought? Do they lack intelligence?
This is indeed one of the fundamental philosophical questions in the field of
artificial intelligence and computer science more broadly.

Although I disagree with the Eridian's argument that math and memory are not
sufficient for defining "thought", I can see its appeal. Math and memory can be
encoded as formal systems. Computation can, as well[^2]. When we define a formal
system, it seemingly loses its mystery, in the same way that the explanation of
a magic trick robs it of its wonder. As humans, we'd like to think we're
special. We'd like to think our intelligence and consciousness can't be fully
captured by symbols and syntax. So, even a novel attempting to break the
shackles of our anthropic worldview can't help but let some leak through.

## Footnotes

[^1]: There's a great [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9uZam0ubq-Y) by
Tom Scott on this topic. 

[^2]: In fact, there are many formal systems for describing computation,
including the [Turing model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Turing_machine) and
its variants, the [lambda
calculus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lambda_calculus) and its variants, the
[pi calculus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/%CE%A0-calculus) and its variants,
and so on. 